English (AU) (Spoken) [Manually Transcribed Captions]
github.com/WizardTim/WizardTim-captions
This is a PMS7002
laser dust sensor from PLANTOWER
I've had it for about
two years now and it's been running
continuously and I've collected a fair
bit of data as you can see here
in particular you can really see the
fires we had recently
at the start of 2020 although on average
over the past two years
it's been exposed to an average of 6.4
micrograms per cubic meter of dust at
PM2.5
size so hasn't been in the most
demanding scenario
although just looking at it it's pretty
dirty so i thought
we'd take a look inside clean it
and show you how it works firstly i'm
just gonna
peel off this plastic protection that's
on the metalwork
the metal cover on both sides are held
down
by these little clips at either edge and
you can just get a spudger and insert
them between the two
and pry up and bend the metal work and
it comes apart
pretty easy however I do find that this
style of spudger
that's thinner at the end is much easier
to get between the two pieces and pry
them apart
and once you've got the metal over all
of those clips it's just a case of
pulling on it
until it opens up although you got to be
careful and make sure you don't pull
too hard otherwise you'll damage the
plastic or bend the metal too much
okay already this is pretty interesting
just with one side off although
whilst we're at it we'll take the second
side off which is now much easier now
that you don't have to get the spudger
between the two pieces just coming from
the side like this
now we have both sides of we can take a
look inside
and the first thing we notice is this
metal work
the case on the back of it is this black
sticker
and that would be to prevent light
reflections either from the laser
or from outside light getting onto the
sensor and affecting the readings
and we can see inside this thing there's
a nice little centrifugal fan
a laser and this little optical cavity
and we can also see that there's some
springs clearly to
keep the chassis of the device grounded
and i'm going to remove them before I
lose them
the other side of the device has the PCB
and this is actually different to what I
was expecting
I took one of these apart last year
and it was a completely different design
here's a picture
and as you can see this one today
it has a custom PLANTOWER chip
whereas the other one has a
ST chip and some other eight pin
SSOP package so I'm not quite sure
what's going on
here is this is this other one of
counterfeit or something
now the reason why I took this other one
apart
last year was because I was a little bit
dumb and managed to plug it in the wrong
way around
and yeah it doesn't like five volts with
the wrong polarity
turns out I blew something up however
looking at the thermal image of it it
was pretty easy to figure out what chip
was getting
way too hot and it ended up just being
this
little five pin SOT23 device here which
i assumed was probably a regulator so I
replaced it with one of these
Micrel 5504 regulators i had laying
around
and it's been working ever since now if
you're like me you're probably wondering
how on earth this thing actually works
and how it derives a value of micrograms
per cubic meter well it's actually
very similar to how a smoke detector
works
however unlike a smoke detector or
cheaper dust sensor
this thing actually has to distinguish
the difference between a small dust
particle and a large dust particle
and to do that we have this whole
package here
this is the block diagram that the
manufacturer gives us
so we're going to look at how this light
scattering actually works
unlike a smoke detector that usually
uses an infrared led
this device has a surprisingly red laser
and it shines through here shines
through these two light baffles
and then into this light trap at the end
and that's just to stop
any stray reflections from hitting the
photo diode at the bottom here
we also know from the data sheet that
this device has a controlled flow rate
of
0.1 liters per minute and that comes
out here across the sensing region
and then out through here through the
centrifugal fan
and that means we have a steady stream
of air
with suspended dust particles coming
through here and
as a dust particle crosses this laser
beam
it will scatter the light onto this
photodiode and you can then pick that up
and
count exactly how many dust particles
have crossed that
laser beam and then you can infer
through the 0.1 liters per minute
exactly how many dust particles are in
one cubic meter of air and of course the
amount of light scattered by the dust
particle
is proportional to the size of the dust
particle as well as its
reflectance i suspect this is the method
the
this unit uses in order to determine the
particle sizes that we see in the data
output
however some other more expensive
scientific
dust measuring devices can also measure
how long the dust particle
spends in the laser beam and at a
constant flow rate you can then infer
the size of the dust particle
however that's a lot more difficult to
measure so i doubt this unit's doing
that
so taking a look at the pcb now and we
can see
after the connector there's a surprising
amount of passives actually
but there's two SOT23 5 pin packages
we know one of them is going to be a 3.3
volt regulator for the
integrated circuits and powering the
laser and everything
the other one i'm not quite sure what it
does it's probably got something to do
with that fan
might be some sort of PWM controller
because the
microcontroller is able to regulate the
fan speed in order to get that
0.1 liters per minute next we also have
here a surprising amount of passives i'm
really not quite sure what they're doing
full of these passives and honestly i
couldn't be bothered to reverse engineer
this thing
especially with the black pcb although
that is kind of required to minimize
light reflections
considering it's under the photodiode
it's got something to do with that
next we have this rather large [LQFP]
package that's been custom labeled PLANTOWER
i doubt this is actual custom silicon so
that would be
pretty expensive for something like this
that requires a
reasonable amount of processing power
however
my wizard senses are tingling and
telling me
by the way the package is shaped with
that location dimple and the way the
leads are formed
this is probably an STM32F part i would
bet
but it could be anything it could be
some chinese mcu manufacturer i've never
heard of
over here we have some more passives as
well as
what looks like a three pin SOT23
transistor
this is clearly to drive the laser the
actual
constant current part of the laser
driving though is
on the back of the PCB next to the [TO-18]
laser and up here interestingly enough
we actually have
a unpopulated device it looks like the
footprint for an eight pin
dfn with an exposed pad my best guess
what this would be
is probably some sort of memory option
maybe it's some sort of EEPROM
that allows it to
record locally some historic data
also here we have four holes through the
pcb so that air can flow to the other
side
i'm not quite sure why they've gone with
four holes and not a slot
i suspect it's probably got something to
do for either a limitation with their
pcb design package or maybe they're
trying to
reduce the weight on the drill bit
drilling a slot
now the pcb is held down by these screws
here
but the other side is nothing it's just
traces
now i open this device up to primarily
clean it so
having a look at it now it looks like
there's a fair amount of dust there's a
quite a fair bit on the blades of this
fan
and there's a little bit round here
and it looks like there might actually
be a little bit on the actual
photodiode now this is why they're
so particular about how you orient this
device
when you deploy it because if you deploy
it the wrong way around
the dust can actually settle on the
photodiode so this
has been in the position in which the
photodiode
has been facing downwards so that no
dust can collect on it hence why it's so
clean
on the other side on the pcb we can see
that it's collected
a fair amount of dust as well i'm not
quite sure why they actually have air
flowing over the pcb
to me it seems like a big risk for
contamination
although i suspect it allows them to
manufacture it a lot cheaper than
having to put the pcb in a separate
compartment
now i'm just cleaning this with a normal
art brush
because i don't actually want to get my
nice esd brushes all dirty with dust
but i'm not too worried about this this
fan here isn't actually held in with any
screws it's just to press
fit so you can just push it out and
clean it separately
and there's actually quite a lot of dust
in this fan
i think there's probably more dust in
the fan than anything else which
i suppose is kind of expected and
i wonder if this has actually got
anything to do with the design of the
PMSA003 which actually has the fan
on the outside of the device and it's
holding with two screws and some
clips so i wonder if that has anything
to do with making it easier to clean
although one thing to note is the
plastic on this fan
isn't as strong as the metal and i've
actually managed to damage one in the
past so
that's one thing to be careful of and
i'm just going to clean the rest of the
device here with
that same art brush although in order to
clean that photo diode i'm using
a q-tip soaked in 100% isopropyl alcohol
and with that done we can have a look
around and everything looks much cleaner
now
i don't know if this will have any
effect on the performance
but it's good to just know it's not
horrifically dirty inside now
and reassembly is easy enough it's just
a matter of popping the fan back in
putting the connectors back on and
in order to put these metal shields back
on
you can just bend the sides back in
although making sure not to bend them
too far
and then just pushing them back on they
clip into place
i'm not sure how many times you can do
this before
the metal starts to fatigue but i
imagine if you're doing this every like
two years it's
not going to be a problem and so that's
what's inside one of these and how to
clean it so thanks for watching
you